---
layout: post
title:  "Naming"
date:   2023-11-11 16:15:00 +1300
categories: programming software-engineering
---

“There are 2 hard problems in computer science: cache invalidation, naming things, and off-by-1 errors.”

Naming things is hard.

1. 






Take, for example, [InternalFrameInternalFrameTitlePaneInternalFrameTitlePaneMaximizeButtonPainter][6]. To the poor Java developer that wrote that one, I just want to say, “We're here for you, buddy, if you need someone to talk to.”

## OO & Java

Is it Java or OO in general that encourages names like [SimpleBeanFactoryAwareAspectInstanceFactory][5]? [“When Verbs are allowed to exist independently, you don't need to invent new Noun concepts to hold them.”][7]

transmogrifier.transmogrify(calvin) => transmogrify(calvin)


## TLA WTF

Naming after your company


## Fanboy naming

Naming after programming language, framework, library or your company.


Don't call it a SpacelySprocketsWidget. Just call it a widget. That way when Cogswell cogs buys you out, you don't have a tedious bunch of renaming to do.



1. Choose descriptive and unambiguous names.
2. Make meaningful distinctions.
3. Use pronounceable names.
4. Use searchable names.


## Utils

Utility just means, “fitness for some purpose.” 


## Avoid loaded terminology

Cute or ugly

master/slave

killDatabase()

bludgeon_file()



## Avoid potential misinformation

Naming after implementation runs the risk that implementations change.

foo.not_disabled => foo.enabled


A name’s length should not exceed its information content. … Global names must convey relatively more information, because they appear in a larger variety of contexts. Even so, a short, precise name can say more than a long-winded one: compare acquire and take_ownership. Make every name tell.
- Russ Cox, tech lead of the Go project
https://research.swtch.com/names


[5]: https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/aop/config/SimpleBeanFactoryAwareAspectInstanceFactory.html
[6]: https://github.com/zxlooong/jdk16045/blob/master/com/sun/java/swing/plaf/nimbus/InternalFrameInternalFrameTitlePaneInternalFrameTitlePaneMaximizeButtonPainter.java
[7]: http://steve-yegge.blogspot.com/2006/03/execution-in-kingdom-of-nouns.html
