---
layout: post
title:  "Stoner by John Williams"
date:   2024-05-01 19:55:00 +1300
categories: books
---

Poor William Stoner. His one break in life is to escape the poverty of farm life to attend the University of Missouri where he discovers a love of literature and scholarship. After that, Murphy's law kicks in and everything that can go wrong, goes wrong.

First comes an unfortunate marriage. His wife Edith is alternately neurotic, hysterical, distant, and sniping. She's repulsed by physical intimacy except for a brief lustful period that results in their only child. She lapses into bed-ridden depression, leaving Stoner to care for the baby single-handedly. When father and daughter develop a loving relationship, Edith intervenes to separate them then dismantles Stoner's study to use as an art studio. There are glimpses of Edith's strict puritanical upbringing and hatred for her own father, but it does't quite add up. Rather than being a complete person with goals that make sense, it feels like her only purpose is to torment the protagonist.

In his professional life, Stoner makes an enemy of Professor Lomax and his favored student Walker, both crippled. Stoner feels bound by integrity to oppose the academically fraudulent, if retorically talented, student. Lomax regards Stoner as unforgivably prejudiced. When Lomax becomes head of the English department, he assigns Stoner the worst possible schedule consisting entirely of introductory classes.

These days, manifesting a character's warped psyche as a physical deformity might be frowned upon. But, what to make of Dave Masters' discourse on the true nature of the University? It is “an asylum... for the infirm, the aged, the discontent, and the otherwise incompetent.” He continues, “But, as bad as we are, we're better than those on the outside, in the muck, the poor bastards of the world. We do no harm, we say what we want, and we get paid for it; and that's a triumph of natural virtue, or pretty damn close to it.”

Stoner's two friends are the clever, acerbic Dave Masters and the solid, loyal Gordon Finch. Both enlist when America joins the war. Masters is killed in France, but his words make a ghostly return later in the book. Stoner remembers him saying, “...something about the University being an asylum, a refuge from the world, for the dispossessed, the crippled. But he didn't mean Walker. Dave would have thought of Walker as - as the world. And we can't let him in. For, if we do, we become just like the world, just as unreal, just as... The only hope we have is to keep him out.”

There are interesting resonances with campus dramas playing out in today's headlines - protests, forced resignations, along with competing claims of victimhood and intellectual dishonesty. It's hard to tell whether there's intentionally a political undercurrent there or it's just easy to read that way from today's perspective.

For most of the book, Stoner refuses to fight for anything. He doesn't go to war. He accepts a failed marriage, his wife's cruel scheming, and the punishments meted out by the vengeful Lomax. He abandons his true love with student Katherine Driscoll when their affair is found out. His passivity gets so uncomfortable that you can't help cheering for Stoner when he finally stands up for himself by teaching a graduate level course to freshman, forcing Lomax to reinstate his advanced classes.

I started Stoner expecting the story of a nondescript character with a beautiful inner life, but that's not what I found. For a novel about the life of the mind in which the disjunction between interior state and external appearence plays a major role, we get precious little access to Stoner's interior - possibly because he refuses to look there himself. The core of the novel is a brand of midwestern American stoicism in which life is suffering and your purpose is to endure. Don't complain, don't try to change your fate; just endure. Stoner might be seen as a academic version of the biblical story of Job, accept that it's not so much a test of faith as a test of endurance.

There are several scenes in which Stoner observes himself doing things without any insight into why he's doing them, as if his own actions simply happen to him. Why doesn't he seek new employment or run away with his lover? How could he abandon his daughter without even trying to defend her? Stoner's lack of agency frustrates the reader and maybe that's the point. Williams described his character as “a kind of saint ... who finds no meaning in the world or in himself, but he does find meaning and a kind of victory in the honest and dogged pursuit of his profession.”


[1]: https://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/the-greatest-american-novel-youve-never-heard-of
[2]: https://www.frontporchrepublic.com/2010/10/handing-higher-education-to-the-cripples-on-john-williamss-stoner/
[3]: https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/books/classic-stoner-not-so-fast/2015/11/02/9f0ed5aa-7db3-11e5-b575-d8dcfedb4ea1_story.html
[4]: https://s-usih.org/2015/11/everything-you-say-is-a-fact-but-none-of-it-is-true-stoner-part-ii/
[5]: https://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2019/02/20/mrs-stoner-speaks-an-interview-with-nancy-gardner-williams/
